federalist 72
the same subject continued and
re-eligibility of the executive
considered from the new york packet
friday march 21 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the administration of government in its
largest sense comprehends all the
operations of the body politic whether
legislative executive or judiciary
but in its most usual and perhaps its
most precise signification it is limited
to executive details and falls
peculiarly within the province of the
executive department
the actual conduct of foreign
negotiations the preparatory plans of
finance the application and disbursement
of the public monies in conformity to
the general appropriations of the
legislature the arrangement of the army
and navy the directions of the
operations of war these and other
matters of a like nature constitute what
seems to be most properly understood by
the administration of government
the person's therefore to whose
immediate management these different
matters are committed ought to be
considered as the assistants or deputies
of the chief magistrate and on this
account they ought to derive their
offices from his appointment at least
from his nomination and ought to be
subject to his superintendents
this view of the subject will at once
suggest to us the intimate connection
between the duration of the executive
magistrate in office and the stability
of the system of administration
to reverse and undo what has been done
by a predecessor is very often
considered by a successor as the best
proof he can give of his own capacity in
desert and in addition to this
propensity where the alteration has been
the result of public choice the person
substituted is warranted in supposing
that the dismission of his predecessor
has proceeded from a dislike to his
measures and that the less he resembles
him the more he will recommend himself
to the favor of his constituents
these considerations and the influence
of personal confidences and attachments
would be likely to induce every new
president to promote a change of men to
fill the subordinate stations and these
causes together could not fail to
occasion a disgraceful and ruinous
mutability in the administration of the
government
with a positive duration of considerable
extent i connect the circumstances of
re-eligibility
the first is necessary to give to the
officer himself the inclination and the
resolution to act his part well and to
the community time and leisure to
observe the tendency of his measures and
thence to form an experimental estimate
of their merits
the last is necessary to enable the
people when they see reason to approve
of his conduct to continue him in his
station in order to prolong the utility
of his talents and virtues and to secure
to the government the advantage of
permanency in a wise system of
administration nothing appears more
plausible at first sight nor more
ill-founded upon close inspection than a
scheme which in relation to the present
point has had some respectable advocates
i mean that of continuing the chief
magistrate in office for a certain time
and then excluding him from it either
for a limited period or forever after
this exclusion whether temporary or
perpetual would have nearly the same
effect and these effects would be for
the most part rather pernicious than
salutary
one ill effect of the exclusion would be
a diminution of the inducements to good
behavior
there are few men who would not feel
much less zeal in the discharge of a
duty when they were conscious that the
advantages of the station with which it
was connected must be relinquished at a
determinant period than when they were
permitted to entertain a hope of
obtaining by meriting a continuance of
them
this position will not be disputed so
long as it is admitted that the desire
of reward is one of the strongest
incentives of human conduct or that the
best security for the fidelity of
mankind is to make their interests
coincide with their duty even the love
of fame the ruling passion of the
noblest minds which would prompt a man
to plan and undertake extensive and
arduous enterprises for the public
benefit requiring considerable time to
mature and perfect them if he could
flatter himself with the prospect of
being allowed to finish what he had
begun would on the contrary deter him
from the undertaking when he foresaw
that he must quit the scene before he
could accomplish the work and must
commit that together with his own
reputation to hands which might be
unequal or unfriendly to the task
the most to be expected from the
generality of men in such a situation is
that negative merit of not doing harm
instead of the positive merit of doing
good
another ill effect of the exclusion
would be the temptation to sorted views
to peculation and in some instances to
use or patient
an avaricious man who might happen to
fill the office looking forward to a
time when he must at all events yield up
the emoluments he enjoyed would feel a
propensity not easy to be resisted by
such a man to make the best use of the
opportunity he enjoyed while it lasted
and might not scruple to have recourse
to the most corrupt expedience to make
the harvest as abundant as it was
transitory though the same man probably
with a different prospect before him
might contend himself with the regular
perquisites of his situation and might
even be unwilling to risk the
consequences of an abuse of his
opportunities his avarice might be a
guard upon his avarice
add to this that the same man might be
vain or ambitious as well as avaricious
if he could expect to prolong his honors
by his good conduct he might hesitate to
sacrifice his appetite for them to his
appetite for gain
but with the prospect before him of
approaching an inevitable annihilation
his avarice would be likely to get the
victory over his caution his vanity or
his ambition
an ambitious man too when he found
himself seated on the summit of his
country's honors when he looked forward
to the time at which he must descend
from the exalted eminence forever and
reflected that no exertion of merit on
his part could save him from the
unwelcome reverse such a man in such a
situation would be much more violently
tempted to embrace a favorable
conjecture for attempting the
prolongation of his power at every
personal hazard than if he had the
probability of answering the same end by
doing his duty
would it promote the peace of the
community or the stability of the
government to have half a dozen men who
had credit enough to be raised to the
seat of the supreme magistracy wandering
among the people like discontended
ghosts and signing for a place which
they were destined nevermore to possess
a third ill effect of the exclusion
would be the depriving the community of
the advantage of the experience gained
by the chief magistrate in the exercise
of his office that experience as the
parent of wisdom is an adage the truth
of which is recognized by the wisest as
well as the simplest of mankind what
more desirable or more essential than
this quality in the governors of nations
where more desirable or more essential
than in the first magistrate of a nation
can it be wise to put this desirable and
essential quality under the ban of the
constitution and to declare that the
moment it is acquired its possessor
shall be compelled to abandon the
station in which it was acquired and to
which it is adapted
this nevertheless is the precise import
of all those regulations which exclude
men from serving their country by the
choice of their fellow citizens after
they have by a course of service fitted
themselves for doing it with a greater
degree of utility
a fourth ill effect of the exclusion
would be the banishing men from stations
in which in certain emergencies of the
state their presence might be of the
greatest moment to the public interest
or safety
there is no nation which has not at one
period or another experienced an
absolute necessity of the services of
particular men in particular situations
perhaps it would not be too strong to
say to the preservation of its political
existence how unwise therefore must be
every such self-denying ordinance as
serves to prohibit a nation from making
use of its own citizens in the manner
best suited to its exigencies and
circumstances without supposing the
personal essentiality of man
it is evident that a change of the chief
magistrate at the breaking out of a war
or at any similar crisis for another
even of equal merit would at all times
be detrimental to the community in as
much as it would substitute inexperience
to experience and would tend to unhinge
and set afloat the already settled train
of the administration
a fifth ill effect of the exclusion
would be that it would operate as a
constitutional interdict of stability in
the administration by necessitating a
change of men it would necessitate
immutability of measures
it is not generally to be expected that
men will vary and measures remain
uniform the contrary is the usual course
of things and we need not be
apprehensive that there will be too much
stability while there is even the option
of changing nor need we desire to
prohibit the people from continuing
their confidence where they think it may
be safely placed and whereby constancy
on their part they may obviate the fatal
inconveniences of fluctuating councils
and a variable policy
these are some of the disadvantages
which would flow from the principle of
exclusion they apply most forcibly to
the scheme of a perpetual exclusion but
when we consider that even a partial
exclusion would always render the
readmission of the person a remote and
precarious object the observations which
have been made will apply nearly as
fully to one case as to the other
what are the advantages promised to
counterbalance these disadvantages they
are represented to be
first greater independence in the
magistrate
second greater security to the people
unless the exclusion be perpetual there
will be no pretense to infer the first
advantage but even in that case may he
have no object beyond his present
station to which he may sacrifice his
independence
may he have no connections no friends
for whom he may sacrifice it
may he not be less willing by a firm
conduct to make personal enemies when he
acts under the impression that a time is
fast approaching on the arrival of which
he not only may but must be exposed to
their resentments on an equal perhaps
upon an inferior footing
it is not an easy point to determine
whether his independence would be most
promoted or impaired by such an
arrangement
as to the second supposed advantage
there is still greater reason to
entertain doubts concerning it
if the exclusion were to be perpetual a
man of irregular ambition of whom alone
there could be reason in any case to
entertain apprehension would with
infinite reluctance yield to the
necessity of taking his leave forever of
a post in which his passion for power
and preeminence had acquired the force
of habit and if he had been fortunate or
droid enough to conciliate the goodwill
of the people he might induce them to
consider as a very odious and
unjustifiable restraint upon themselves
a provision which was calculated to
debar them of the right of giving a
fresh proof of their attachment to a
favorite
there may be conceived circumstances in
which this disgust of the people
seconding the thwarted ambition of such
a favorite might occasion greater danger
to liberty than could ever be reasonably
dreaded from the possibility of a
perpetuation in office by the voluntary
suffrages of the community exercising a
constitutional privilege
there is an excess of refinement in the
idea of disabling the people to continue
in office men who had entitled
themselves in their opinion to
approbation and confidence the
advantages of which are at best
speculative and equivocal and are
over-balanced by disadvantages far more
certain and decisive
publius